# NeurAugVR

This project combines the latest research findings for effective stroke rehabilitation together with novel biomedical systems for brain monitoring (EEG, fMRI) and VR biofeedback, providing simpler and effective neurorehabilitation solutions. The aim of this project is to develop a novel and more inclusive rehabilitation system with the use of novel ICT technologies, in order to overcome current limitations. This will be achieved by identifying the neural correlates of motor action during motor imagery through brain imaging (fMRI), and differences in brain activation with different training feedback protocols for formulating user-specific models that will be used later in neurofeedback rehabilitation sessions through immersive VR feedback. The socio-economic impact of such a system is significant, allowing for novel personalized and home-based eHealth solutions for all patients. Thus, also decreasing the financial burden in the national health system.

## Abstract

Every year millions of people worldwide suffer from stroke, being one of the leading causes of death and longterm disability. This leads to cognitive and motor impairments, resulting in loss of independence in their daily life together with an additional psychological impact in mood disorders and depression. Evolving to a chronic condition, stroke requires continuous rehabilitation and therapy. Personalised Virtual-Reality (VR) approaches have been shown to accelerate the recovery process compared to non-Information and communication technologies (ICT) based interventions. However, most of these novel VR approaches are suitable only for a reduced subset of patients, generally those with better recovery prognostics and better motor control. Thus, the idea of training the central nervous system was established, through EEG-based neurofeedback (NF) and motor-imagery (MI). Although the benefits of MI-NF have been illustrated in a plethora of studies, the reduced ability for stroke patients to use NF does not allow an accurate control, reducing the capabilities of MI-NF systems.

The aim of this project is to develop a novel and more inclusive rehabilitation system with the use of novel ICT technologies, in order to overcome current limitations. This will be achieved by identifying the neural correlates of motor action during motor imagery through brain imaging (fMRI), and differences in brain activation with different training feedback protocols for formulating user-specific models that will be used later in NF-MI rehabilitation sessions. This will facilitate the use of neural interfaces to train the central nervous system; specifically, we will develop a personalized EEG-based immersive NF through VR for MI training. The ultimate goal is to generalize the findings into a VR-NF-MI training paradigm for both admitted and ambulatory patients as well as continued domestic care.

The impact of the project can be expected on multiple levels. At the scientific level, it will contribute to further understanding the neuro-physiological brain plasticity mechanisms underlying motor recovery after a stroke; and provide yet necessary further evidence on the benefits of ICT driven rehabilitation approaches

On the technological level, it proposes novel methodologies for training and monitoring rehabilitation after a brain lesion; offering to the community an open architecture to share and facilitate the development of future ICT systems for rehabilitation. Further, given the nature of this research area the potential socio-economic impact of such a system is significant, allowing for novel personalized and home-based eHealth solutions for patients. Thus, also decreasing the financial burden in the national health system.

Finally, the real-world deployment of this unique system with our clinical partners will provide us extremely valuable data, which will help us to validate and quantify the impact of such novel approach.

## Aim of the project

The aim of this project is to develop a novel and more inclusive motor rehabilitation paradigm with the use of novel ICT technologies, that overcomes current limitations, especially for stroke patients with low level of motor control.

Our approach combines the latest research findings for effective stroke rehabilitation together with novel biomedical systems for brain monitoring (EEG, fMRI) and VR biofeedback.

This will be achieved following 3 main research objectives:

1. To understand the brain activity during MI-NF training using simultaneous EEG-fMRI acquisition. This will be achieved by developing computational models for inferring EEG features from fMRI motor activation patterns measured during the execution of training, thus exploiting the higher spatial resolution of fMRI. These individualized computational models will be exploited in a subsequent EEG-based VR-MI-NF training.
2. Clinical evaluation of the impact of the novel upper-limb NF paradigm to train motor function through inclusive rehabilitation with the use of BCIs for neurofeedback on a longitudinal intervention.
3. To quantify the extent of motor recovery and cortical reorganization induced by the NF-VR paradigm by comparing a pre, post and follow up assessments.

## Publications

- Vourvopoulos, A., Blanco-Mora, D. A., Aldridge, A., Jorge, C., Fernandes, J-C., Figueiredo, P., & Bermúdez I Badia, S. Influence of VR-based Brain-Computer Interfaces Training in Brain Activity and Clinical Outcome in Chronic Stroke: A Longitudinal Study of Single Cases, 27 October 2022, PREPRINT (Version 1) available at Research Square (https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-2193322/v1)
- Nunes, L., Vourvopoulos, A., Blanco-Mora, D. A., Aldridge, A., Jorge, C., Fernandes, J-C., Figueiredo, P., & Bermúdez I Badia, S. “Brain activation by a VR-based motor imagery and observation task for upper limb rehabilitation”. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering (TNSRE) (https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-2193322/v1)
- Vourvopoulos, A., Blanco-Mora, D. A., Aldridge, A., Jorge, C., Figueiredo, P., & Bermúdez I Badia, S. (2022). “Enhancing Motor-Imagery Brain-Computer Interface Training With Embodied Virtual Reality: A Pilot Study With Older Adults”. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Metrology for Extended Reality, Artificial Intelligence and Neural Engineering.
- Legeay, S., Caetano, G., Figueiredo, P., & Vourvopoulos, A. (2022, June). “NeuXus: A Biosignal Processing and Classification Pipeline for Real-Time Brain-Computer Interaction”. In 2022 IEEE 21st Mediterranean Electrotechnical Conference (MELECON) (pp. 424-429). IEEE.
- Blanco-Mora, D. A., Aldridge, A., Jorge, C., Vourvopoulos, A., Figueiredo, P., & Bermúdez I Badia, S. (2022). “Impact of age, VR, immersion, and spatial resolution on classifier performance for a MI-based BCI”. Brain-Computer Interfaces, 1-10.
- Sánchez-Cuesta, F. J., Arroyo-Ferrer, A., González-Zamorano, Y., Vourvopoulos, A., Badia, S. B. i, Figuereido, P., Serrano, J. I., & Romero, J. P. (2021). Clinical Effects of Immersive Multimodal BCI-VR Training after Bilateral Neuromodulation with rTMS on Upper Limb Motor Recovery after Stroke. A Study Protocol for a Randomized Controlled Trial. Medicina, 57(8), 736. (https://doi.org/10.3390/medicina57080736)
- Accoto, F., Vourvopoulos, A., Gonçalves, A., Bucho, T., Caetano, G., Figueiredo, P., De Paolis, L., & Badia, S. B. i. (2021). The Effect of Neurofeedback Training in CAVE-VR for Enhancing Working Memory. In T. Dingler & E. Niforatos (Eds.), Technology-Augmented Perception and Cognition (pp. 11–45). Springer International Publishing. (https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30457-7_2)
- Blanco-Mora, D., Aldridge, A., Jorge, C., Vourvopoulos, A., Figueiredo, P., & Bermúdez i Badia, S. (2021). Finding the Optimal Time Window for Increased Classification Accuracy during Motor Imagery: Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference on Biomedical Engineering Systems and Technologies, 144–151. (https://doi.org/10.5220/0010316101440151)
- Vourvopoulos, A., Niforatos, E., Bermudez i Badia, S., & Liarokapis, F. (2021). Brain–Computer Interfacing with Interactive Systems— Case Study 2. In Intelligent Computing for Interactive System Design: Statistics, Digital Signal Processing and Machine Learning in Practice (Parisa Eslambolchilar, Andreas Komninos, and Mark Dunlop). ACM Press.
- Putze, F., Vourvopoulos, A., Lécuyer, A., Krusienski, D., Bermúdez i Badia, S., Mullen, T., & Herff, C. (2020). Editorial: Brain-Computer Interfaces and Augmented/Virtual Reality. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 14. (https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2020.00144)
- Nunes, J., Vourvopoulos, A., Blanco-Mora, D., Jorge, C., Fernandes, J.-C., Fernandes, S., Bermúdez i Badia, S., & Figueiredo, P. (2020). fMRI brain activation during a novel VR-based motor imagery and observation task: comparison with a conventional motor imagery task. (https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.21185.17768)
- Silva, A. P., Cameirão, M. S., & Bermúdez i Badia, S. (2020). Diving into a Decade of Games for Health Research: a Systematic Review. International Congress on Information and Communication Technology.
- Blanco Mora, D. A., Almeida, Y., Jorge, C., & Bermúdez i Badia, S. (2019a). A Study on EEG Power and Connectivity in a Virtual Reality Bimanual Rehabilitation Training System. IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics. IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Bari, Italy.
- Bucho, Teresa; Caetano, Gina; Vourvopoulos, Athanasios;Accoto, Floriana;Esteves, Inês; Badia, Bermúdez i Badia, Sergi; Agostinho Claudio, Rosa; Figueiredo, Patricia. (2019, July 23). Comparison of Visual and Auditory Modalities for Upper-Alpha EEG-Neurofeedback. 2019 41st Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC), Berlin, Germany.
- Diego Andrés Blanco Mora, Sergi Bermúdez i Badia, Yuri Almeida and Carolina Jorge Vieira. (2019b). Inter- and Intra-Hemispheric EEG Connectivity in Healthy Subjects and Chronic Stroke Survivors. International Conference on Virtual Rehabilitation (ICVR), Tel Aviv.
- Modroño, C., Bermúdez, S., Cameirão, M., Pereira, F., Paulino, T., Marcano, F., Hernández-Martín, E., Plata-Bello, J., Palenzuela, N., Núñez-Pádron, D., Pérez-González, J. M., & González-Mora, J. L. (2019). Is it necessary to show virtual limbs in action observation neurorehabilitation systems? Journal of Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies Engineering, 6, 205566831985914. (https://doi.org/10.1177/2055668319859140)
- Vourvopoulos, A., Jorge, C., Abreu, R., Figueiredo, P., Fernandes, J.-C., & Bermúdez i Badia, S. (2019). Efficacy and Brain Imaging Correlates of an Immersive Motor Imagery BCI-driven VR System for Upper Limb Motor Rehabilitation: A Clinical Case Report. Front. Hum. Neurosci. (https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2019.00244)
